Remove Batch Fee For Precommit, Lower BatchBalancer and Remove Gas-limited Constraints (#1094)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-lowerbatchBal.md

---
fip: "00XX"
title: Remove Batch Fee For Precommit and Lower batchBalancer

> author: irene, ZX, AX

Reviewer: editorial: please tag appropriate/valid GitHub account.

Author: done

> discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1092

Reviewer: Could you please create a separate discussion dedicated to this proposal - so that it is easier to capture a discussion that is specific to what is proposed here?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1105 is a specific discussion dedicated to this FIP

status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2024-12-19
---

# FIP-00XX:Remove Batch Fee For Precommit and Lower batchBalancer

## Simple Summary
This FIP proposes to:
- Remove the batch fee from `PreCommitSectorBatch2` to incentivize batching during the precommit step;

> - Revert `batchBalancer` to the original value of 2 nanoFIL to make aggregation rational for a larger range of base fee value with respect to today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Revert `batchBalancer` to the original value of 2 nanoFIL to make aggregation rational for a larger range of base fee value with respect to today's network conditions.
```

## Abstract
`batchBalancer` and the batch gas fee were introduced in [FIP13](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md) for provecommit and later updated in [FIP24](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0024.md), where the fee was added to the precommit step as well. 

> This mechanism makes batching in precommit and aggregation in provecommit rational (ie, cost-effective) only when the base fee is above a given threshold (which depends on `batchBalancer`, other parameters used in the mechanism and the gas used). This FIP proposes to revert to no fee for precommit and lower the value of `batchBalancer` to 2 nanoFIL in order to have no BaseFee threshold for batching precommit and a lower BaseFee threshold for aggregating provecommit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This mechanism makes batching in precommit and aggregation in provecommit rational (ie, cost-effective) only when the base fee is above a given threshold (which depends on `batchBalancer`, other parameters used in the mechanism and the gas used). This FIP proposes to revert to no fee for precommit and lower the value of `batchBalancer` to 2 nanoFIL, from the current 5 nanoFIL, in order to have no BaseFee threshold for batching precommit and a lower BaseFee threshold for aggregating provecommit.
```

I had to get too far down in the doc to find an answer to this question I had immediately when I read the simple summary.

> This mechanism makes batching in precommit and aggregation in provecommit rational (ie, cost-effective) only when the base fee is above a given threshold (which depends on `batchBalancer`, other parameters used in the mechanism and the gas used). This FIP proposes to revert to no fee for precommit and lower the value of `batchBalancer` to 2 nanoFIL in order to have no BaseFee threshold for batching precommit and a lower BaseFee threshold for aggregating provecommit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mechanism makes batching proof during precommit step and proof aggregation during provecommit step rational (i.e., cost-effective) only when the base fee is above a given threshold (which depends on `batchBalancer`, other parameters used in the mechanism and the gas used). This FIP proposes to revert to no fee for precommit and lower the value of `batchBalancer` to 2 nanoFIL in order to have no BaseFee threshold for batching proof for  precommit and a lower BaseFee threshold for aggregating proof for provecommit.
```

## Change Motivation

> Since August, gas used for onboarding methods has been higher than in the past year (see [#1092](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1092) for more details on data and causes).  A simple mechanism to reduce gas consumption is batching: at times of high demand for network gas, storage providers (SPs) should be incentivized to batch as much as possible for both precommit and provecommit.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since August 2024, gas used for onboarding methods has been higher than in the past year (see [#1092](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1092) for more details on data and causes).  A simple mechanism to reduce gas consumption is batching: at times of high demand for network gas, storage providers (SPs) should be incentivized to batch as much as possible for both precommit and provecommit.  
```

### Precommit

> Due to the batch fee, currently precommit batching is only rational when the base fee exceeds 0.09 nanoFIL. Removing this fee will eliminate this obstacle, enabling more batching and therefore gas saving. To have a rough estimate of the saving, we can compare two recent messages (no deal)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the batch fee, currently precommit batching is only rational when the base fee exceeds 0.09 nanoFIL. Removing this fee will eliminate this obstacle, enabling more batching and therefore gas saving. To have a rough estimate of the saving, we can compare two PreCommitSector messages without deals from the same miner: 
```

- [Msg 1](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzacedrbvzzcea3uwtqmas7zp5moxxpbceywukxux5fvgnbi2pj25hkjs): PreCommiSectorBatch2 for 1 sector : 16.5 M gas used

> - [Msg 2](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzacebbc5pdzweouhvopgfvlc4trlips4ynszut774fxkv5omz3cicd3e): PreCommitSectorBatch2 for 4 sectors):  177 M/ 4 =  ~4.5 gas used (per sector)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Msg 2](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzacebbc5pdzweouhvopgfvlc4trlips4ynszut774fxkv5omz3cicd3e): PreCommitSectorBatch2 for 4 sectors):  17.7 M/ 4 =  ~4.5 M gas used (per sector)
```

> Which indicates that batching can bring a ~70% of gas saving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two messages are posted to the same miner actor with little difference in the number of sectors when the message landed. The difference in gas usage indicates batching can bring a ~70% of gas saving. 
```

Reviewer: 1. You may have better ways of framing this, but I think we can't be certain that gas saving is from batching without controlling/limiting other variables.

### Provecommit

> At precommit there are two options: (1) "simple" batching as in precommit (ie, one message for ≥ 2 sectors) where there is a porep proof for each sector in the batch, and (2) batching with aggregation, where there is one unique aggregated porep proof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two options for ProveCommitSector3: (1) "simple" batching as in precommit (ie, one message for ≥ 2 sectors) where there is a porep proof for each sector in the batched message, and (2) aggregating proofs of multiple sectors and post in one message. 
```

Reviewer 4: Ok this suggestion makes more sense, thanks @jennijuju

> At precommit there are two options: (1) "simple" batching as in precommit (ie, one message for ≥ 2 sectors) where there is a porep proof for each sector in the batch, and (2) batching with aggregation, where there is one unique aggregated porep proof.

Reviewer: >  this sentence is only showing the contrast between precommit and provecommit, 

I believe the author made a typo here, and they are trying to describe the two different strategies that can be used for provecommit -I suggested edits based on my understanding.

> At precommit there are two options: (1) "simple" batching as in precommit (ie, one message for ≥ 2 sectors) where there is a porep proof for each sector in the batch, and (2) batching with aggregation, where there is one unique aggregated porep proof.

Author: Jen is correct, I'll update the text!

Batching for provecommit is already rational (cost-effective), as the batch fee applies only to aggregated proofs (opposed to precommit, where the batch balancer applies to batching). 

> On the other hand, aggregation is rational only when the base fee exceeds 0.065 nanoFIL. Lowering the value of `batchBalancer` from 5 to 2 nanoFIL will reduce the crossover point to 0.026 nanoFIL, making the aggregation rational across a broader range of base fee values.

Reviewer 4: Why 2 nanoFIL? And why 0.026 nanoFIL for the crossover? Any modelling to back these choices versus other values?

Author: cc @zx @AxCortesCubero

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I would like to see the reasoning for the value choice in the FIP so that anyone future person reading this FIP can understand the full context without needing to hunt down gdoc links.

> On the other hand, aggregation is rational only when the base fee exceeds 0.065 nanoFIL. Lowering the value of `batchBalancer` from 5 to 2 nanoFIL will reduce the crossover point to 0.026 nanoFIL, making the aggregation rational across a broader range of base fee values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, aggregation is rational only when the base fee exceeds 0.065 nanoFIL today. Lowering the value of `batchBalancer` from 5 to 2 nanoFIL will reduce the crossover point to 0.026 nanoFIL, making the aggregation rational across a broader range of base fee values.
```

Reviewer: Can you specify how you get the 0.065 nanoFIL number? If this is true - it sounds like SP client like lotus-miner should[ change their default immediately ](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/edfa817dafc8a03400f2e75f2df6805be67243b1/node/config/def.go#L139) so that aggregation is enabled whenever base fee is higher than 0.065 nanoFIL (and the network does have >0.065nanoFIL base fee sometimes atm).
<img width="349" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d13b3065-7bad-4ce6-b909-38ccfc944f1e" />

Author: The value 0.065 nanoFIL was computed by @zixuanzh using the new cost (gas units) of PCS3, more details can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17FYnKIGf1uf1cCUwfKd30pQpTq8fAux5YghRIlfqrdE/edit?tab=t.0#bookmark=id.6nsiuog2eny3)

To have a rough estimate of the gas saving, we compared these messages (no deals)

> - [Msg 1](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzaceaddryxumxg35givyt7pe745wlsmrlrx7bj4sdb56nho4akyi5tzu): ProveCommitSectors3 for 1 sector (no deals): 78.5M 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Msg 1](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzaceaddryxumxg35givyt7pe745wlsmrlrx7bj4sdb56nho4akyi5tzu): ProveCommitSectors3 for 1 sector (no deals): 78.4 M 
```

> - [Msg 2](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzaceah7m6jzravjoswo2pljzit36euu3sgz5jzbnpkcfp23b76texiv6): ProveCommitSectors3 for 4 sectors, batched (no aggregation): 96.M/4 = 24M per sector 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Msg 2](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzaceah7m6jzravjoswo2pljzit36euu3sgz5jzbnpkcfp23b76texiv6): ProveCommitSectors3 for 4 sectors, batched (no aggregation): 96.4 M/4 = ~24.1 M per sector 
```

> - [Msg 3](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzacedeh74ds4x4l5nlfahmlvwn4obfukhgqnf6rxlaargvsm56sljune): ProveCommitSectors3 for 4 sectors, aggregated[^*]: 217M/4 = 54M per sector 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Msg 3](https://www.filutils.com/en/message/bafy2bzacedeh74ds4x4l5nlfahmlvwn4obfukhgqnf6rxlaargvsm56sljune): ProveCommitSectors3 for 4 sectors, aggregated[^*]: 217.4 M/4 = ~54.4 M per sector 
```

> [^*]: In practice, aggregation is currently giving less gas saving respect to batching due to a bug causing single proofs to be charged an incorrect amount of gas units. So currently, batching is to be preferred with respect to aggregation. Once this code bug is fixed, batching will cost more gas units and aggregation would be the option with the largest gas unit saving per sector. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^*]: In practice, aggregation is currently giving less gas saving respect to batching due to a bug causing single proofs to be charged an incorrect amount of gas units. So currently, batching is to be preferred with respect to aggregation. Once this bug in the ref-fvm implementation is addressed, proof aggregation will be the most gas-efficient approach if one can onboard 4 or more sectors at the same time. 
```

Reviewer: > can onboard 4 or more sectors at the same time.
 technical: @irenegia can you confirm whether this is still correct?

Author: ack, working on that

- Decrease `BATCH_BALANCER` value to 2 nanoFIL.

## Design Rationale
Long-term solutions for reducing onboarding gas will focus on decreasing state storage gas costs (we estimated that state storage gas may get to  ~66% of the total cost for pcs3 messages with no deals) and optimizing state updates.  
This FIP takes an orthogonal approach by enhancing support for batching and aggregation at times of high demand, which are simple yet effective ways to free chain bandwidth immediately.  

This FIP also reduces state storage cost by batching. Much of this cost comes from updating state over and over, batching helps alleviate that significantly.

In the future, we envision stronger support for aggregation by potentially replacing the batch balancer mechanism from provecommit with alternate fees that align all participants  with the network's long-term health. For additional context, see https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/557 and https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/587.

## Backwards Compatibility
This FIP modifies actor behavior and will require a new Filecoin network version.

## Test Cases

> - Certain test cases (similar to as FIP24)  may need to be adjusted when changing the BatchBalancer value.
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Remove test cases from [FIP-0024](./fip-0024.md) that related to testing PreCommit and the 25%/75% split in batch fee between PreCommit and ProveCommit.
- Remove expectations that rely on the `SinglePreCommitGasUsage = 16433324.1825` value originating from [FIP-0024](./fip-0024.md). The remaining gas charge for commits be `SingleProveCommitGasUsage = 49299.972.5475`, i.e. applied only on ProveCommit.
- Decrease test expectations involving the batch balancer in ProveCommit from a value of `5` to `2`.
```

By lowering the BatchBalancer value, the network is incentivizing more aggregation at a lower equilibrium BaseFee value, thus freeing up more chain bandwidth. By reverting to the original BatchBalancer of 2 nanoFIL, the equilibrium network crossover BaseFee for ProveCommit (when aggregating for ProveCommit becomes rational) is at around 0.025 nanoFIL, incentivizing ProveCommit aggregation at a broader range of BaseFee values. In the medium term, however, BatchBalancer is intended to be replaced with an explicit proof fee at the time of onboarding. 

## Product Considerations
From a product perspective, this FIP is expected to:
- Lower onboarding costs for SPs by removing barriers to precommit batching (e.g., precommit batch fee);
- Encouraging batching and aggregation reduces block space consumption, reducing the risk of higher base fee values;
- Simplify analysis and cost calculations for SPs by removing of precommit batch fee.

## Implementation

> Specs-actors PR: TODO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
builtin-actors PR: [TODO](https://github.com/filecoin-project/builtin-actors/pull/1595)
```
